Unify internal observability documentation - 1 of 3 (#4246)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/collector/internal-telemetry.md

---
title: Internal telemetry
weight: 25
cSpell:ignore: journalctl kube otecol pprof tracez zpages
---

You can monitor the health of any OpenTelemetry Collector instance by checking
its own internal telemetry. Read on to learn how to configure this telemetry to
help you [troubleshoot](/docs/collector/troubleshooting/) Collector issues.

## Activate internal telemetry in the Collector

By default, the Collector exposes its own telemetry in two ways:

- Internal [metrics](#configure-internal-metrics) are exposed using a Prometheus
  interface which defaults to port `8888`.

> - [Logs](#configure-internal-logs) are emitted to `stdout` by default.

Reviewer: I think we output logs to stderr by default https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/d0f15e2463f8176e943c44fc7502f7ac80bacb0e/service/telemetry/config.go#L73

```suggestion
- [Logs](#configure-internal-logs) are emitted to `stderr` by default.
```

You can enhance the metrics telemetry level using the `level` field. The
following is a list of all possible values and their explanations.

- `none` indicates that no telemetry data should be collected.
- `basic` is the recommended value and covers the basics of the service
  telemetry.
- `normal` adds other indicators on top of basic.
- `detailed` adds dimensions and views to the previous levels.

For example:

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      level: detailed
      address: ':8888'
```

The Collector can also be configured to scrape its own metrics and send them
through configured pipelines. For example:

```yaml
receivers:
  prometheus:
    config:
      scrape_configs:
        - job_name: 'otelcol'
          scrape_interval: 10s
          static_configs:
            - targets: ['0.0.0.0:8888']
          metric_relabel_configs:
            - source_labels: [__name__]
              regex: '.*grpc_io.*'
              action: drop
exporters:
  debug:
service:
  pipelines:
    metrics:
      receivers: [prometheus]
      exporters: [debug]
```

{{% alert title="Caution" color="warning" %}}

Self-monitoring is a risky practice. If an issue arises, the source of the

> problem is unclear and the telemetry is unreliable.

Reviewer 2: Late to the party, but this caution text doesn't make sense / is incomplete.

Author: I changed the caution text in #4322. Please let me know if the new alert makes more sense.

Reviewer 2: Great, thanks! I'll add comments, if any in #4322.

---
title: Internal Telemetry
weight: 25
cSpell:ignore: journalctl kube otecol pprof tracez zpages
---

> The Collector offers multiple ways to measure and monitor its own health. In
> this section, you'll learn how to enable internal observability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can check the health of any Collector instance by checking its own
internal telemetry. Read on to learn how to use this data to diagnose and
troubleshoot Collector issues.
```

Suggesting this rewording to make it less about the Collector offers and more about what the user can do with this data.

> ## Enabling observability internal to the Collector
> 
> By default, the Collector exposes service telemetry in two ways:
> 
> - Internal [metrics](#configuring-metrics) are exposed using a Prometheus
>   interface which defaults to port `8888`.
> - [Logs](#configuring-logs) are emitted to `stdout`.
> 
> [Traces](#configuring-traces) are not exposed by default but two feature gates
> offer experimental support for a configuration based on the OpenTelemetry
> Configuration schema.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Activate internal telemetry in the Collector

By default, the Collector exposes its own telemetry in two ways:

- Internal [metrics](#configuring-metrics) are exposed using a Prometheus
  interface which defaults to port `8888`.
- [Logs](#configuring-logs) are emitted to `stdout` by default.

[Traces](#configuring-traces) are not exposed by default. Two feature gates
offer experimental support for a configuration based on the OpenTelemetry
Configuration schema.
```

I wonder if we should mention traces at all. How would they help in troubleshooting Collector issues? Perhaps @bogdandrutu and @open-telemetry/collector-maintainers know.

Reviewer: We could leave traces out of the picture for now, given that the support is quite experimental yet. @codeboten What do you think?

Author: I've made the text changes suggested by @theletterf and will wait to hear from @codeboten about removing the traces section.

Author: Pinging @codeboten one more time to see if they have thoughts before I move forward with removing the traces section.

Author: Removed traces from this PR in c2fef88. Resolving this conversation.

> ### Configuring metrics

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Configure internal metrics
```

Following Google's style guide, better go the plain or base form: https://developers.google.com/style/headings

Prometheus metrics are exposed locally on port `8888` and path `/metrics`. For

> containerized environments, you may want to expose this port on a public

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
containerized environments, you might want to expose this port on a public
```

https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#may

containerized environments, you might want to expose this port on a public

> interface instead of only locally.

Reviewer 4: Is that clear enough? For example, `127.0.0.1` and `0.0.0.0` could both be interpreted as "locally", however the former causes issues in some cases in the context of containerized environments.

Author: How about the following, which I have copied from [another section](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#telemetry) of the docs website? (@theletterf @svrnm Do we care about redundancy here?)

> You can configure how internal metrics are generated and exposed by the Collector. By default, the Collector generates basic metrics about itself and exposes them for scraping at http://127.0.0.1:8888/metrics. You can expose the endpoint to one specific or all network interfaces when needed. For containerized environments, you might want to expose this port on a public interface. 

I can then add some additional color to the sample config that follows.

Reviewer 4: Thanks, works for me.

Set the address in the config `service::telemetry::metrics`:

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    metrics:

>       address: ':8888'

Author: ```suggestion
      address: '0.0.0.0:8888'
```

```

To visualize these metrics, you can use the
[Grafana dashboard](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/15983-opentelemetry-collector/),
for example.

> You can enhance the metrics telemetry level using the `level` field. The

Reviewer 4: Can we point to a complete list of the metrics for each level?

Author: I'm not aware of such a list. Do you have one in mind that you could link here?

Reviewer 4: OK, thanks for clarifying and I don't have such a list, hence I was wondering :)

@svrnm any suggestions whom from SIG Collector to loop in here?

Reviewer 5: tagging @open-telemetry/collector-approvers, please take a look!

If this takes some time to compile that list we can put this into an issue and by that a follow up PR

Reviewer: I think we should do this on a separate PR, we are working on that on open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/pull/9767

Reviewer 5: @tiffany76 create a new issue referencing this discussion and then you can mark this conversation as resolved

Author: Issue created (#4278). Closing conversation.

- `none` indicates that no telemetry data should be collected.
- `basic` is the recommended value and covers the basics of the service
  telemetry.
- `normal` adds other indicators on top of basic.
- `detailed` adds dimensions and views to the previous levels.

For example:

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      level: detailed
      address: ':8888'
```

The Collector can also be configured to scrape its own metrics and send them

> through configured pipelines. For example:

Reviewer: Should we add a note here about how doing this is a bit dangerous? Monitoring yourself is usually frowned upon since if something goes wrong, you can't trust yourself to reliably transport the observability data

Reviewer 3: I think our distro does that by default: https://github.com/signalfx/splunk-otel-collector/blob/main/cmd/otelcol/config/collector/agent_config.yaml#L69-L85 

+CC @atoulme

Reviewer 4: Agreed with @mx-psi, this needs to be called out (and ideally we point out best practices, https://tractatus.one/otelcol-metrics-pipeline-3d161983b5b9 comes to mind?)

Author: Here's what I've come up with for a 'Caution' callout. Please let me know if I should make any changes or additions.

> Self-monitoring is a risky practice. If an issue arises, the source of the problem and the reliability of telemetry data become questionable.

Reviewer 5: A simple warning like that is a good starting point

Author: Added note in [625af6f](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/4246/commits/625af6f18d342df25c5418c89e05e745cb565c68). Resolving conversation.

```yaml
receivers:
  prometheus:
    config:
      scrape_configs:
        - job_name: 'otelcol'
          scrape_interval: 10s
          static_configs:
            - targets: ['0.0.0.0:8888']
          metric_relabel_configs:
            - source_labels: [__name__]
              regex: '.*grpc_io.*'
              action: drop
exporters:
  debug:
service:
  pipelines:
    metrics:
      receivers: [prometheus]

>       processors: []

Reviewer: We can just drop this
```suggestion
```

      exporters: [debug]
```

> ### Configuring logs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Configure internal logs
```

You can find log output in `stdout`. The verbosity level for logs defaults to
`INFO`, but you can adjust it in the config `service::telemetry::logs`:

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    logs:
      level: 'debug'
```

You can also see logs for the Collector on a Linux systemd system using
`journalctl`:

{{< tabpane text=true >}} {{% tab "All logs" %}}

```sh
journalctl | grep otelcol
```

{{% /tab %}} {{% tab "Errors only" %}}

```sh
journalctl | grep otelcol | grep Error
```

> {{% /tab %}} {{< /tabpane >}}

Reviewer 3: Nice!

### Configuring traces

Although the Collector does not expose traces by default, an effort is underway
to
[change this](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/issues/7532).
The work includes supporting configuration of the OpenTelemetry SDK used to
produce the Collector's internal telemetry. This feature is currently behind two

> feature gates:

Reviewer 3: See comment above. Not sure if we should talk about traces at all, given its status.

```

The gate `useOtelWithSDKConfigurationForInternalTelemetry` enables the Collector
to parse configuration that aligns with the
[OpenTelemetry Configuration](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-configuration)
schema. Support for this schema is still experimental, but it does allow
telemetry to be exported using OTLP.

The following configuration can be used in combination with the aforementioned
feature gates to emit internal metrics and traces from the Collector to an OTLP
backend:

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      readers:
        - periodic:
            interval: 5000
            exporter:
              otlp:
                protocol: grpc/protobuf
                endpoint: https://backend:4317
    traces:
      processors:
        - batch:
            exporter:
              otlp:
                protocol: grpc/protobuf
                endpoint: https://backend2:4317
```

See the
[example configuration](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-configuration/blob/main/examples/kitchen-sink.yaml)
for additional configuration options.

> Note that this configuration does not support emitting logs as there is no

> > support for logs in OpenTelemetry Go SDK at this time.

Author: Is this still true? @codeboten added this note in November, but the [issue](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/issues/3827) linked in the [repo doc](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/observability.md#how-we-expose-telemetry) was closed on February 26.

Reviewer 5: maybe skip that note?

if we keep it use the following formatting:

```suggestion
{{% alert title="Note" %}}

Note that this configuration does not support emitting logs as there is no
support for logs in OpenTelemetry Go SDK at this time.

{{% /alert %}}
```

telemetry. Read on to learn how to use this data to diagnose and troubleshoot
Collector issues.

## Activate internal telemetry in the Collector

By default, the Collector exposes its own telemetry in two ways:

- Internal [metrics](#configure-internal-metrics) are exposed using a Prometheus
  interface which defaults to port `8888`.
- [Logs](#configure-internal-logs) are emitted to `stdout` by default.

[Traces](#configure-internal-traces) are not exposed by default. Two feature
gates offer experimental support for a configuration based on the OpenTelemetry
Configuration schema.

### Configure internal metrics

You can configure how internal metrics are generated and exposed by the
Collector. By default, the Collector generates basic metrics about itself and
exposes them for scraping at http://127.0.0.1:8888/metrics. You can expose the
endpoint to one specific or all network interfaces when needed. For
containerized environments, you might want to expose this port on a public
interface.

Set the address in the config `service::telemetry::metrics`:

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      address: '0.0.0.0:8888'
```

> To visualize these metrics, you can use the
> [Grafana dashboard](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/15983-opentelemetry-collector/),
> for example.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

@open-telemetry/docs-maintainers are we OK with linking out to this dashboard here? My concern is less that it is a vendor website (since we reference grafana oss at a few places already), but if we want to approve this 3rd party dashboard over others.

Reviewer 4: Can we create our own Grafana dashboard and host it here? For example, I can contribute the one from https://github.com/mhausenblas/ref.otel.help/tree/main/otel-collector-ops as the starting point (which was developed based on our experiences)?

Author: Removed in 9f2d105. Resolving conversation.
